Dev Guide for Cluster Sharding/Migration (#364)
microsoft/garnet: website/docs/dev/cluster/migration.md

---
id: slot-migration
sidebar_label: Migration
title: Migration Overview
---

# Slot Migration Overview

> In Garnet, slot migration, refers to the act of re-assigning slot ownernship and moving (i.e. ***migrating***) the associated key-values pairs from one node to another while the cluster is fully operational.

Reviewer: This might clarify this sentence:

```suggestion
In Garnet, slot migration involves re-assigning slot ownership from one node to another and moving (i.e., ***migrating***) the associated key-values pairs while the cluster is fully operational.
```

Author: Rewrote, thanks for the suggestion!

The migration operation is only available in cluster mode.

> It can be initiated only by the original owner (a.k.a source node) of a given slot and addressed towards another already known, and trusted cluster node (a.k.a target node).

Reviewer: Small suggestion:

```suggestion
Slot migration can be initiated only by the original owner (referred to as the *source node*) of a given slot and addressed towards another already known and trusted cluster node (referred to as the*target node*).
```

Author: Rewrote, thanks for the suggestion!

Both the source and target node have to be primary nodes.

> Migration is triggered manually by using the MIGRATE command that operates in two modes (1) Migrate individual keys (2) Migrate entire slots or range of slots.

Reviewer: Small suggestion:
```suggestion
Migration is triggered manually by using the `MIGRATE` command that operates in two modes: (1) Migrate individual keys and (2) Migrate entire slots or range of slots.
```

Author: Rewrote, thanks for the suggestion!

This page is focused on the slot migration implementation details.
For more information about using the associated command refer to the slot migration [user guide](../../cluster/key-migration).

> 

Reviewer: Unnecessary empty line
```suggestion

```

Author: removed newline

# Implementation Details

The implementation of migration operation is separated into two components

1. Command parsing and validation component.
2. Migrate session operation and management component.

> 

Reviewer: Unnecessary empty line
```suggestion

```

Author: removed newline

The first component is responsible for parsing and validating the migration command arguments.
Validation involves the following:

1. Parse every migration option and validate arguments associated with that option.

> 2. Validate ownership of associated slot that is about to be migrate.
> 3. For KEYS option, validate that keys to be migrated do not hash across different slots.
> 4. For SLOTS/SLOTSRANGE option, validate no slot is referenced multiple times.
> 5. For SLOTSRANGE option, make sure a range is defined by a pair of values.
> 6. Validate that target of migration is known, trusted and has the role of a primary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Validate ownership of associated slot that is about to be migrated.
3. For `KEYS` option, validate that keys to be migrated do not hash across different slots.
4. For `SLOTS/SLOTSRANGE` option, validate no slot is referenced multiple times.
5. For `SLOTSRANGE` option, make sure a range is defined by a pair of values.
6. Validate that the target of the migration is known, trusted and has the role of a primary.
```

Author: Rewrote, thanks for the suggestion!

> When parsing completes succesfully, a migrate session is created and executed.

Reviewer: NIT: You might want to consider calling it _migration session_ for consistency.

Author: made the change

Depending on the chosen option, the migrate session executes as a foreground task (using KEYS option) or a background task (SLOTS/SLOTSRANGE option).

The second component is separated into the following sub-components:

1. ```MigrationManager```
2. ```MigrateSessionTaskStore```
3. ```MigrateSession```

The ```MigrationManager``` is responsible for managing the active ```MigrateSession``` tasks.

> It uses ```MigrateSessionTaskStore``` to atommically add or remove new ```MigrateSession```.

Reviewer: Typo:

```suggestion
It uses ```MigrateSessionTaskStore``` to atomically add or remove new ```MigrateSession```.
```

Author: Good catch, will have to enable spell check in vs code.

> It is also responsible for ensuring that existing sessions do not conflict with session that are about to be added by checking if the referred slots in each session do not conflict.

Reviewer: Typo:

```suggestion
It is also responsible for ensuring that existing sessions do not conflict with sessions that are about to be added, by checking if the referred slots in each session do not conflict.
```

Author: Rewrote, thanks for the suggestion!

Specifically, when a slot transitions to a new state, the segment that implements the actual state transition will have to spin-wait after making the change and return only after all active client sessions have moved to the next epoch.

An excerpt of the code related to epoch protection during slot state transition is shown below.
Every client session, before processing an incoming packet, will first acquire the current epoch.
This also happens for the client session that issues a slot state transition command (i.e. CLUSTER SETSLOT).
On success of updating the local config command, the processing thread of the previous command will perform the following:

1. release the current epoch (in order to avoid waiting for itselft to transition).
2. spin-wait until all thread transition to next epoch.
3. re-acquire the next epoch.

This series of steps ensures that on return, the processing thread guarantees to the command issuer (or the method caller if state transition happens internally), that the state transition is visible to all threads that were active.
Therefore, any active client session will process subsequent commands considering the new slot state.

> <details>

Reviewer: These code blocks don't seem to render correctly in the Github markdown preview. Can you verify they will work fine in the generated documentation HTML?

Author: I have been using them in other parts of the website also. I checked them locally and they render fine. Will make sure again!

        }

        .
        .
        .

        /// <summary>
        /// Release epoch, wait for config transition and re-acquire the epoch
        /// </summary>
        public void UnsafeWaitForConfigTransition()
        {
            ReleaseCurrentEpoch();
            clusterProvider.WaitForConfigTransition();
            AcquireCurrentEpoch();
        }

        /// <summary>
        /// Wait for config transition
        /// </summary>
        /// <returns></returns>
        internal bool WaitForConfigTransition()
        {
            var server = storeWrapper.GetServer();
            BumpCurrentEpoch();
            while (true)
            {
            retry:
                var currentEpoch = GarnetCurrentEpoch;
                Thread.Yield();
                var sessions = server.ActiveClusterSessions();
                foreach (var s in sessions)
                {
                    var entryEpoch = s.LocalCurrentEpoch;
                    if (entryEpoch != 0 && entryEpoch >= currentEpoch)
                        goto retry;
                }
                break;
            }
            return true;
        }        
        ```
</details>

> During migration, the change in slot state (i.e. ```MIGRATING```) is transient from the perspective of the source node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During migration, the change in slot state (i.e., ```MIGRATING```) is transient from the perspective of the source node.
```

Author: Rewrote, thanks for the suggestion!

                $"{(workers[workerId].Role == NodeRole.REPLICA ? workers[workerId].ReplicaOfNodeId : "-")} " +
                $"0 " +
                $"0 " +
                $"{workers[workerId].ConfigEpoch} " +
                $"connected" +
                $"{GetSlotRange(workerId)}" +
                $"{GetSpecialStates(workerId)}\n";
        }
        ```
</details>

## Migrate KEYS Implementation Details

Using the ```KEYS`` option, Garnet will iterate through the provided list of keys and migrate them in batches to the target node.
When using this option, the issuer of the migration command will have to make sure that the slot state is set appropriately in the source, and target node.
In addition, the issuer has to provide all keys that map to a specific slot either in one call to MIGRATE or across multiple call before the migration completes.
When all key-value pairs have migrated to the target node, the issues has to reset the slot state and assign ownership of the slot to the new node.

```MigrateKeys``` is the main driver for the migration operation using ```KEYS`` option.
This method iterates over the list of provided keys and sends them over to the target node.

> This happens in two steps, (1) look in the main store and if a key exists send it over while removing it from the list of keys to be send, (2) search object store for any remaining keys, not found in the main store and send them over if they are found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This happens in two steps: (1) look in the main store and if a key exists send it over while removing it from the list of keys to be send and (2) search object store for any remaining keys, not found in the main store and send them over if they are found.
```

Author: fixed, thanks for the suggestion!
